Anyway, congratulations on this wonderful book.
I have to tell you, I haven't had it long enough, but I do want to get this in, you know, it won't be in this week, it'll be in the week following.
But certainly what I read so far, it does seem to me that we have a bookend to Mosquito Coast.
That was the idea.
You know, when I wrote to Mosquito Coast,
I thought that I was writing this book.
I thought I was writing a book about a preacher.
And then it turned out that Ali Fox was only a preacher in a very general sense.
I thought he was going to be quoting the Bible all the time.
He really did.
And it turned out that he does occasionally.
He sort of knows it, but he's kind of rejected it.
So Milroy is a kind of born-again Ali Fox, as you might have gathered.
The tone is certainly more affirmative, I guess.
Is that a fair reading, more positive, more upbeat?
I think that's true.
I think that is true.
It certainly, it's not rejecting the state.
Ali Fox rejects, oh, he's a scientist.
He's full of Yankee ingenuity.
He rejected America.
That's very much the prevailing...
mood of the late seventies was, um, this was a great country once.
It isn't anymore.
Uh, the Arabs are cutting off the oil.
Uh, we're going to have to think of something else.
Why not go somewhere else and start all over again?
Whereas Milwares is, we've proven, time has proven us to have done the right thing.
Where, um, the things that are wrong can be
I'm sorry, the things in Iran came what?
They can be fixed.
We can revitalize this country.
So all this country needs is to eat better, get regular, get more vitamins, live longer, and care a little bit more.
I heard a very good expression in the past few days.
The man was talking about food.
He was a British guy.
And he's saying, people don't eat meals anymore.
They graze all day.
I wish I had heard that, you know, a year and a half ago.
I would have used that.
Where would you have used that to affect us?
Well, Bill Roy would have said, we've got, mealtime is a big thing because meals are,
There is a kind of transformation that takes place where people sit down together, and when they get up, they are more of one mind.
It's a good family thing, whether they are related or not.
And people who graze, we can't have any more grazing, no more grazing, just heaven.
But the idea of just people snacking all day and eating, it doesn't bond you to anything and it doesn't make you healthy either.
Now, these are buzzwords, of course, bonding, but when did you hit on this idea of nutrition as a mission, the Johnny Appleseed of nutrition, so to speak?
Well, since Mosquito Coast, because Ali talks about that, if you recall.
Look at her over there.
She's full of cheeseburgers.
There's another cheeseburger.
The idea is also in Half Moon Street where the woman there is a food nut.
Chicago Loop is a food nut.
I think so for the past 10 years since I started getting interested in it I've started to put it in these books and I think that's obviously the origin of it.
What things that I care about I just write about and whether it's
paddling a kayak or eating.
Well, I read someplace that I'm not so sure about the voices, but the characters are manifestations of yourself.
Is that a fair reading of someplace?
I think so, yeah.
I think so.
I mean, I can't say, oh, this isn't a satire where I'm completely outside it.
I actually think that I'm part of this whole thing.
And one thing,
I eat this kind of food.
I mean, I've always... This sort of high-fiber vegetarian diet.
I was doing it a bit more when I was writing the book.
But I think probably since I... I gave up smoking in 81.
And since then, I got interested in alternative things.
When you give up smoking, do you smoke, or did you...
I smoked cigars for 20 years and gave them up about six or seven years ago.
But you know how you have to... That's a pretty good example because you've got to replace it with something.
Yeah.
The day is a bit longer.
If you smoke, it absorbs time.
It got to the point where I was getting in the car in the morning and I couldn't wait to get in.
And of course, you know, we're running dogs now.
I mean, you can't smoke anywhere.
Oh, it's terrible.
The...
So I couldn't wait to get in the car, and I said, Jesus, this is what I'm coming to.
I can't wait to get out there and light this thing up.
You can't smoke at home.
You can't smoke here.
And, of course, my wife's happier.
I don't stink like I used to.
It's hard on other people, but you could also, because you can't explain to people how pleasant smoking is to the person who's doing it.
It sounds...
It smells awful to other people.
But I loved the good, I mean, I smoked very nice cigars, I have to say.
I mean, I never smoked a cheap cigar, and I really did savor them, I have to say.
You certainly continue to be concerned with obsession and the obsessive nature of people.
Is that right, or is that just...
Yes.
I think that probably there's a particular type of person that appeals to me, and that's... It's versions of the writer.
It's inventors, like Ali Fox, or preachers, teachers, priestly types, magicians, all of that.
They all sort of strike me as being versions of writers.
They're people...
where the message is that they're changing one thing into another.
They demand attention.
They're addressing the multitude.
Everything that writers do, except they don't pick up a pen.
Writing about writers is pretty unrewarding because no one wants to hear it.
No one wants to read those books.
Chris, you know, one of Shakespeare's favorite images of the writer is the magician, which you use in this book.
What is that?
Well, Prospero, I think, comes closest to being Shakespeare's, you know, signature character.
He's a magician.
I think the magician can also be a writer.
Very much so.
I mean, Thomas Mann called himself, and his family called him, the magician.
He used to sign his name Z for Zalbara.
Really?
Yeah, and they called him the magician.
And he called himself a magician.
And the Magic Mountain and Mario and the magician were all, he was, yeah, obsessed with it.
I won't say obsessed, but interested in it.
Interested.
He saw himself in that mold.
Yeah.
No, I read the PW interview, which says nothing about the book.
I mean, it's a very good biographical interview, but it says nothing about this new book.
Have you read the PW interview yet?
One of the publishers weekly?
With who?
Sam Staggs.
No?
No.
It's just the very latest PW.
In fact, it's dated March 7th.
And I took it to New York with me.
I have it here.
I read it.
But it's a nice, nice interview.
But the only reason I mention it is it does give some... I didn't realize, for instance, that you had been arrested once in the Peace Corps.
That was news to me.
Oh, yeah.
I had problems with the Peace Corps.
Yeah.
In fact, I was ejected from it in late 60s.
That's an interesting story.
I was too political.
But, I mean, he does give your age as 52, which is pertinent to a degree.
By the way, what is the date of that?
March 7th.
You got a fax down there?
Yes, I do.
Would you like me to fax this to you?
That would be wonderful.
You don't mind that there's some notes on it?
I mean, I've written on it.
Not at all.
I'll give you my fax.
Okay.
It's 508-888-9192.
9192.
Okay, I'll fax this to you when we're done.
Okay.
I really appreciate it.
As long as you don't mind my having written on it and stars and stuff, you know, just some ideas.
My daughter's playing the piano upstairs.
Wonderful.
uh where was i i i guess the reason i mentioned that is uh you know the age the midlife is this very definitely a uh a novel written by a man in his early 50s i would say so i said to someone um i wrote a piece for a law magazine uh and it's in this month it's actually about it's the origin of the book this is another thing that uh jonathan marda and irina said
We've contacted a lawyer.
I said, oh, yeah.
And they said, they want you.
And I said, they want me to write an article.
I said, well, you know, I said, of course.
But aren't they going to interview you?
And they said, no, they would really rather that you wrote something.
And I said, well, that's a lot of work, you know, a 2,000-word piece.
Are they going to pay you for this?
I mean, the thing is, I was working on something.
I was actually working on a script.
So they said, um,
They fixed me up with an assignment.
But I don't want an assignment.
I wanted, you know, maybe to do what you and I are doing now.
Yeah.
Talk for an hour or so and whatever.
and let the other guy do it which is yeah because that's well anyway so i wrote the piece but if you get the piece um well now what's the publication allure a-l-l-u-r-e oh allure okay i thought you were saying a law a law review or something no no allure it's makeup magazine but it's pretty good well who are you trying to hit hit there who are you trying to reach in that magazine ask them that i don't know i don't know
Interesting, huh?
2,000 words?
And so what was this piece about?
Go ahead.
No, the piece is about the origins, where I got the idea, right on the Mosquito Coast, traveling in the Pacific.
I was in New Guinea, and some people on an island had lovely teeth, and I realized I'm shortening the story.
come to the point that they were a Seventh-day Adventist.
They were eating very, very good food, and they were the healthiest people in the Trobriand Island.
So I went on in that vein.
But I guess what started this is my question, is this a work, a midlife work?
Okay, that's a fair question.
So you say, yes, and someone asked me in the law for their biographical note.
And the sound bite they got was, when I was younger, I wrote about people smoking marijuana and drinking too much.
Now that I'm a bit older, I'm writing about people who are interested in longevity, health, and eating right.
I mean, it's true.
In the family arsenal, the guy smokes opium.
I, you know, smoked and drank.
I was never a heavy drinker.
I never really drank, and I still don't drink much.
I wasn't even a heavy smoker, but I smoked.
But the thing is, it's true.
At a certain age, when I turned 40, this is 81 or so, I got interested in health and living a little bit longer and figuring out what I should do maybe to enable that to happen.
And I think it's quite a natural thing.
Some people just
They make no allowances whatsoever.
They just carry on and drink pretty much the way they always did.
But I decided to make a few adjustments.
And as a consequence, I started writing about them.
Because my life was always in my work, it would be inconceivable for me to care about eating in an interesting way and then not write about it.
I found myself today giving someone a ride, just dropping someone off, and she had had a weight problem.
And I started asking her about her weight, and she was really interesting.
Again, this is something I wish I had met her a year and a half ago, because she was so wonderful.
She would wake up in the middle of the night and eat a pint of ice cream, cherries.
I said, what flavor?
She said it was brownie, you know.
Anyway, but I find myself riveted by that kind of thing.
So I find it interesting, fascinating, amusing, enlightening.
And then this is also part of my life.
So is it a midlife thing?
Yeah, definitely, definitely.
And fortunately, a lot of people in midlife buy books.
They're exactly the same as me.
They're the same age.
They're thinking about these things.
They're doing these things.
I took up kayaking 10 years ago.
How old was I?
42.
42, yeah.
And before then, I hadn't really done a lot of heavy exercise, but I thought, nah, I think I'll get out a bit more.
So I wrote The Happy Hours of Oceania.
It was a fun trip because I was able to do it paddling a kayak.
And I was getting from...
island to island and i was writing about it this fellow in the pw piece uh suggests that uh uh maybe maybe it's true maybe it's not uh of course i think of you as a total writer uh but he he suggests that the world at large the reading world at large knows you as the travel writer it might be surprised to learn that you do you know these novels
It's funny, isn't it, that he should say that when, first I started out writing novels, and I've published many more novels than I have traveled, and I think of myself as a novelist.
But people do say things like that, and I can't remember this guy.
He must have been younger.
I don't know him.
In fact, his name is Sam Staggs, and all it says is Staggs is a frequent contributor to PW.
And I'll tell you, it's a very good biographical piece.
It says really very little about the book at hand except, here's a quote, Millroy the Magician is about an obsession with food, diet, and American culture.
In fact, this is a quote from you.
It's my own life, in a sense, writ large and embroidered upon.
Maybe.
Yeah, I mean, that's...
I'm not, and again, I'm not asking you to quote on somebody else's story.
I just hope to have it here at hand.
No, I understand.
But his statement, someone else thought of something, something about Paul Theroux.
you know better known as travel writer but he writes novels too yeah well he said that he says here for instance which uh uh that they might be surprised to learn that that you that you wrote pesquito coast you know which was a movie that you i mean jesus christ that was one of his very best novels i thought you know i know uh anyway some people are oblivious of
you know, things that you do.
A lot of people never knew that Delmore Schwartz wrote short stories.
They thought he was just a poet.
And actually, he was a very accomplished short story and thought of himself as a short story writer.
And, I mean, they think that Robert Louis Stevenson only wrote Treasure Island.
They don't realize that he wrote dozens of other books, many of them much greater than Treasure Island.
But
You get, that's just the way of the world.
I think the helpful thing is when books are, not all my books are in print and paperback, but they're sort of going back into print and paperback now.
And it's really the availability of books that conditions what people think about you, whether they can find you in a bookstore.
And when they can, then they begin to revise that.
Do you feel, I mean, because you do write in so many different forms, I mean, do you say, well, I finished the novel, now it's time, maybe perhaps to do a collection of stories, or it's time to get on the road again, get out there and travel wherever?
Your question is, how do I decide what you're doing?
I tend to be working on a fictional project all the time.
This is a kind of continuous process.
For example, when I was traveling in the Pacific, I was working on a novella called Lady Max, which appeared in Granthamack.
Do you know Granthamack?
Yes.
Okay.
It appeared there about four issues ago.
There's a Richard Ford story, which is the cover story, and mine was in that.
So this Lady Max I was working on, the one that just before then I had written...
My Secret History.
Then I, after I finished My Secret History, I started this long story.
And I was writing it while I was writing the Pacific book.
When I finished the Pacific book, I wrote Milroy.
And after I finished Milroy, I've been working on a long story, which I think will be a collection, or it might be, it's a book very similar to My Secret History.
And so I've been working on this fiction.
In other words, I don't... I see the writing of fiction as a continuous activity.
I have never really stopped doing it.
But every so often, I really feel the need to get away.
I feel a tremendous curiosity about a place, and usually a very large place, area, region.
and think of a way of seeing it.
And I've been sort of thinking about that at the moment, where I might go.
But at the same time, I'm working on these stories.
So I think I'm not doing a lot of things at the same time.
I'm only doing one thing at a time.
But fiction is the continuous, sort of predictable activity that I pursue.
What place?
I mean, where do you hear the muses, the siren song beckoning from now?
A lot of places, because I'm aware of the fact that there's parts of the world that I've covered pretty well.
China, South America, India, and so forth.
But I had England.
I've never been to Africa.
I've never written about Africa.
I lived in Africa for a while.
I've never written about
Scandinavia, Canada, Alaska, sort of northern hemisphere.
I've never written about Brazil, though I went to South America.
And I'm keenly aware that I have never really done much about the Mediterranean.
So I've got these four possibilities.
There's a lot, actually.
Oh, plenty, yeah.
Plenty.
And all interesting.
So there's no shortage of... Even, you know, one of the most, to me...
one of the strangest and most interesting travel books would be a book about... would be the same trip at a different time.
In other words, taking the same trip again and writing about it.
You'd hate to have people think this is Jaws 2, on the other hand.
No, it's not.
It would be... No, that's true.
But when you think that...
It wouldn't be.
It couldn't be.
It wouldn't be George.
I'm teasing.
You know what I'm saying.
I know.
I know you are.
But when you think that.
When I went to the railway resort, I wrote 20 years ago.
I actually finished taking the trip 20 years ago.
I went in 73, finished in 74, wrote the book in 75.
I guess the book appeared in 75.
But it was, you know, I went through Turkey.
Iran, Afghanistan, Vietnam, all these places that have changed and came back through the Soviet Union.
That would be interesting, wouldn't it, huh?
Totally different.
Life is all politically different.
And the routes are different.
Some of them have, they're easier to travel.
And guess what?
You're different, too.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, you'd be carrying different baggage, wouldn't you?
Totally, totally.
Or maybe not totally, but quite different.
So I had thought, I'm not going to do that, because I'd like to go to new places.
But it strikes me as being, you know, someone should do it all.
Maybe I will.
I don't know.
Well, I mean, there's only one person that can do that for your books, and that's you.
I don't know if anyone has ever taken that kind of trip.
It's just as though...
Later in life, Graham Greene went from Sierra Leone into Liberia again and wrote Journey Without Maps again.
It would be, it would just, everyone's different.
I'm not familiar with that later work.
About West Africa.
Yeah, but how did that work compared to... No, no, he didn't go again, but I said it's just as if... Oh, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, okay.
No, no, he didn't.
In fact, he swore he would ever go back.
Okay.
That's why I was saying, geez, I don't know if that's... No, no, no, I don't know anyone who's done it twice.
But to me, it strikes me as being...
Well, you're certainly young enough.
You could do it at some point.
But obviously, there's no dearth of ideas.
I mean, it's just the time to do them all, I guess.
The problem is that it does travel as you get older.
Is...
It seems more difficult.
I get to the point where I think, oh, God, this is terrible.
I hate being on this plane.
I hate being in this town.
Or I think this is an awful lot of trouble to go to to begin travel, you know, going to a plane.
So you get crankier.
You get crankier.
You get more demanding.
And also you think, why am I putting up with this inconvenience?
And it does color the story that you're going to write because you're angry.
Not angry, but...
Why do you think I don't have to do this?
Yeah, but that's certainly going to color the product, the written product.
I mean, you might not be giving this place a fair shake because of this feeling, too.
I'm aware of that, and that's why I go to quite a lot of trouble to... Excuse me.
Bless you.
I don't want to do that, but I think there's nothing good that you can say about air travel, you know, long-distance air travel.
This is nothing...
good about it.
Yeah, but let's say you get stuck at the Athens airport.
You're there for half a day.
It happens to everybody.
I was stuck in London the other day.
I was on a flight.
Oh, when the mortar shells were coming in?
When the mortar shells were coming in?
No, no, this is, no, London to Boston.
Oh, yeah.
No, no, no, no, no.
I heard about that in the face.
Yeah.
This was a week before.
And, uh, excuse me.
Bless you.
Um, I was on a flight.
They said, okay, um, the
We've got an electrical problem, everyone off.
You know, I had to get up at 6 o'clock in the morning.
It's been 1 o'clock, everyone off.
They said, there's a flight leaving at 3.
It's going to Minneapolis.
We'll redirect you.
And God.
You don't need this.
Sorry.
Excuse me.
Earlier today, I was out paddling my kayak.
And that's why I got dismissals.
It's very windy.
Yeah.
So, yeah, there's a lot of inconvenience, and then good things happen, too, in travel.
Once you get all that behind you, there are nice things.
When does the story start to develop, or does it develop when you get back?
The Milroy story started long ago.
I mean, it started, I think, when I was writing, maybe it started when I read Elma Gantry.
Oh, really?
Or me, or Flannery O'Connor, what is that?
Wise Blood, or... Could be.
Everything That Rises Must Converge.
Those are both hers.
Do you know that... What is the other one?
Anyway, that kind of... I love that...
the preacher story, always did.
Maybe it started with Jim Jones.
Just being aware of it.
For me, that's one of the, in my lifetime, that's one of the most striking things that's happened in my lifetime.
I would say that the Jonestown self-suicide.
Whatever.
That is on a par with
with the Vietnam War, with the death of Kennedy.
Really?
With the end of the Cold War.
Yeah, definitely.
Why?
Because, I mean, they almost seem like an aberrational group.
It does seem so, but it's a very large number, and it's because of race that was a factor.
Poverty was a factor.
Rejection of the state was a factor.
The fact that Leo Ryan...
was killed, you know, the congressman.
The congressman, yeah.
Everything that went along with it, not just this one guy with a group of cranks in the jungle, but that it, these were people that we know.
I mean, you run across this sort of person all the time who finds hope with a leader, and he had churches round about.
He had met Rosalind Carter.
I mean, Jim Jones is a type that, he's quite a familiar type.
You do see him.
He's kind of on the fringes.
He's the organizer.
He gets people out to vote.
He's the man, you know,
Well, the guy down in Waco is not unlike him, right?
Not unlike him.
Not at all.
Except that there was something bigger about Jim Jones.
Well, if there were 900 people in the compound, maybe they all would have gone up in flames, too, though.
Very likely.
But you actually, the origin of the... Right.
Oh, no, where does the book come from?
I think they start... There's a seed very early.
I don't know whether... The first one must be very, very early.
But to me, it starts with a character.
It starts with a person, always.
And then...
what that person is capable of doing.
And I always saw, I mean, any character that I've written about, I could recall thinking of the person and thinking of what they do and what they say.
And they're all, as I say, I guess, versions of writers.
I don't write about
recluses or people who are not doers.
They tend to be doers.
Think of my novel, Picture Palette, The Woman's a Photographer.
Well, she's a photographer, but she might be a writer.
In Family Arsenal, the central character there on Jungle Belfast, in other words, going way back, they're very active people.
And organizing or, you know,
getting things done.
And as the physicians would say, they take invasive procedures, right?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's a good way of putting it.
They, they, so I, the origin of this obviously is, it's not only what, you know, people I've met, it's the news, the news affects me, just, you know, life affects me, things that I know, things that I've read.
I was,
Very, very determined not to write.
I didn't want to write a book about a hypocrite.
Typically, this novel could be about a priest or a preacher who has this group of youngsters and he's abusing them in some way.
That's very much of the moment.
But I didn't want to write that.
First, I think it's been written.
Virtually every book about an evangelist or a preacher or a priest is about a hypocrite.
Elmogantry is about a hypocrite.
I mean, you just mentioned Elmogantry right earlier.
This is the quintessential hypocrite, of course.
And in The Power of the Glory, the priest is a drinker and has a mistress and a child.
It's very hard to find a priest or preacher in literature who's not reading every law who rules the book.
And some of the best priests, for example, are written... I mean, some of the most interesting writing along this line is by J.F.
Powers.
Do you know his work?
Yes.
The Prince of Darkness, the stories, and Mort Durbin.
But that's... I find his stuff interesting.
He's not writing about hypocrites.
He writes about priests as... As I understand, a random house dropped him.
Did you know that?
No, I didn't know that.
Somebody told me that.
He's...
I should say James Joyce because he's not a great stylist, but he's a tremendously interesting writer.
And I've been reading him since I was in high school.
He writes with a Catholic sensibility, doesn't he?
Yeah.
But his priests drink, they play golf, they show up at the Rotary Club.
They're just Rotarians.
And he's really, really good.
He's also very funny.
But I was...
deeply influenced by him, because I have had a religious upbringing, and then when I read him, I thought, these are the people I know.
I understand the priest in his book, because these are the sort of good-time charlies, glad-handing
smoking, drinking priest that I knew.
I didn't know Pius one more.
One of my favorite guys when I was on my aircraft carrier back in the Vietnam War was this Catholic priest from Boston, Father Dunn.
And we used to go into Japan, and boy, he would be right over there in the Hutsey baths, and I can't say he would be doing anything beyond the steam half and the massage, but he had a good time.
He was a lovely man.
That's true.
I like that, what you just said, because it's not hypocrisy, but there's something human about it.
And he's obviously not a candidate for sainter.
On the other hand, you wouldn't say, oh, he's a hypocrite, he doesn't practice what he preaches.
He's like the rest of us.
So I wanted Milroy to be more like that than like David Koresh or Albert Gantry.
I thought, I don't want there to be an
an ugly surprise or an ugly secret.
I actually wanted him to be odd and even slightly scandalous.
Now, didn't Updike suggest the possibility of a Nabokovian scene here, a Lolita kind of a thing?
He mentioned that.
That's right.
He said someone actually wants us to believe that this man can actually...
cohabit with a little girl, dressed her up as a boy and so forth, and not put a foot wrong.
Actually, it is a love story.
Toward the end, he does declare his love.
And she's a bit older, and he says, you know, I really do, I love you.
And she's totally freaked out by it, of course, because up to that moment, she's just seen him as a guardian, as his sort of father figure.
Well, I don't think that's so unusual or unbelievable.
It's believable that he doesn't do anything, and it's believable that he makes his move after a period of time, that he gains her confidence.
How essential was she to this, to the structure here?
I mean, because he, the book, the initial character clearly is him.
I mean, he's the subject.
But, you know, why the adolescent narrator, I guess?
I think, well, I wanted someone who was truthful, a totally reliable man, and one who was somewhat suspending her disbelief, and someone that he was affecting.
So it's that, it's more, I can't think where I've,
I think of it as, you know, a writer that affected me a lot is Joyce Carey.
I don't know whether you've read much of his work.
No.
The Horse's Mouth or... No.
Anyway, he has this kind of... He often has a kind of... Excuse me.
He has a spouse telling a story.
And it starts saying, well, you know, this one...
Nina Nimmo, it's a book called Not Honor More, where she's telling a story about her husband.
Her husband is an amazing guy, but she's just there making bread and saying, well, he came home and he said this, then he did this.
And she's telling you this story about an extraordinary man, but she's an ordinary person.
But you tend to believe that person more.
And then when she registers the prize, then you do.
But it's not...
In other words, it's not telling you anything.
It's actually telling you it's a reliable witness.
Anyway, I thought that this young girl type is also a type that I run across.
Say on the Cape, for example, the one that's always saying Zoe.
And I'm like, why is he doing this to me?
And he's like,
Why did you do it?
He's like, it's wicked.
This is the kind of language that I find fascinating, too.
And just someone who might
turn up at a county fair.
And there's a freshness to it, of course, too.
I hope so.
It must be quite a challenge.
I mean, we all say, those of us who read Shakespeare, I mean, if the man has a feeling, it was his inability to characterize the young person, you know?
I mean, all those youngsters sound like brilliant little people, you know?
Unfortunately.
He does have a few kids.
There's a kid, Marmelius, in The Winter's Tale, who's not too... Really?
Yeah.
He's the daughter of Leonti... Okay, we'll just... You know, going back 20-odd years ago, I used to teach Shakespeare's Problem Plague.
Yeah, so that...
But you're right.
But my point is it's quite a risk for you to take because the authenticity of this narrator is, I mean, if she fails, the book fails.
So you really have to be damn sure that you can pull this thing off.
Her voice, her psyche, and the whole works.
I think that's true.
And you can't be put off by it.
Intimidated by it probably either.
Yeah.
Ben, I'm sorry, I interrupted you saying something.
No, I was going to say that there are people who would just be bewildered by this.
What is this 52-year-old, this spectacled guy sitting there doing a kind of ventriloquism act with a 14-year-old girl?
Well, it's the magician, too, as a writer, the writer as a magician.
I guess you can conjure this youngster.
Yes, there's that, too.
But I think it's, Mosquito Coast is told by Fox, and I always, I had tried to write that story a number of different ways.
I tried to narrate it, and I wasn't quite sure how it should be done.
When I did it, I thought that he would be a very important character, Charlie, telling it.
Then I realized that telling the story, he's not.
It's the father that's important.
And he's talking about his father.
And you stop paying very much attention to Charlie.
And the father assumes a very central place because Charlie's talking about him.
And there's also a resonance because he is talking about him.
But you pay less attention to the son than the father.
And it also is helpful if the person being written about
is very articulate, because that person can then describe, for example, or Ali Fox, have a rather oracular tone, and they're very, very articulate.
But there's this tremendous stylishness in the way they speak, and all the kids are doing is reporting this speech, and that's actually quite helpful, too.
I mean, it's a satire.
It's a satire, of course.
Do you set out to poke fun at contemporary America or do you set out to tell a hell of a really enjoyable story and this other stuff takes care of itself?
I think that I set out to tell this extraordinary, what I think of as an amazing story and to
And I hope that the reader is riveted by it.
In the meantime, it is about the way we live now.
It's about the life going on around us on television in life.
It's about health and longevity and faith.
all the things that we want for ourselves and we're willing to make allowances for or to adapt ourselves for and I don't know anyone else who does this if you go to other countries people say well I was born with this body and this fate and I think I'll just sort of follow it down the line it's rare for people to say I'm going to
I'm going to reshape my life, first my body and then my soul, and then I'm going to live longer.
The idea of rejuvenation and revitalizing and living longer than your parents and all that, but consciously doing it is embarrassing.
You know, and it must be a tightrope that you have to walk.
On the one hand, you really want it to identify, particularly, it's a book of the 1990s, as the mosquito coast, as we mentioned earlier, was a book of the 1970s.
But on the other hand, you don't want it to be dated either.
You want people to pick it up 10 or 20 or 30 years later and say, this is a work of literature which maintains its resonance.
that's true and i mean i hope that's the case but there is a book uh are you asking about um and i didn't even i haven't mentioned this to other people because it hasn't occurred to me but i read uh do you know um the book trilby by george dumouriez have you ever read it no okay it's not a great book but it's a book that the character spengali appears in really yeah
Spengali is a magician, and Trilby is a young girl, and they sort of, they meet, and Spengali just sort of takes charge of her.
And Trilby wears a hat, and that's where we get the expression, the Trilby hat.
Okay.
And so a lot of people say he's a real Spengali, but Spengali comes from that novel, and...
It just occurred to me, but I read that, and I was thinking, this isn't a great book, but it's got a lot of charm, and it's very interesting.
This old guy, and this rather pretty young girl.
And Milroy is a kind of Spengalian, not kind of Spengalian, he is a Spengalian.
And he even, you know, the magic and so forth.
But I think this
There's more substance to it than that.
Which I have to ask you.
I don't want to take up your whole afternoon.
You have quite a lot.
No, I still got a lot of stuff.
You might end up with a lot more than you have.
Well, it's always fine.
I would much rather have more than...
Just, I mean, how about finding all of these biblical eating references?
Tell me a little bit about the research here.
Oh, well, that's pretty easy.
I mean, did you go to a concordance or something for this?
No, although I have one.
Occasionally, but concordances aren't that helpful.
You look under fish and the pages of it.
But it's...
It's a lot of it just, you know, traveling in hotels reading the Gideon Bible.
That's a great line.
It's true.
And the other is when these people in New Guinea told me that they didn't eat fish without scales, we don't eat snakes, we don't eat lizards, we don't eat turtles, we don't eat...
We don't eat the things that are prohibited in Leviticus book, chapter 11.
I was thinking, well, there must be a lot of things in the Bible that we don't know, that they're unaware of.
And, you know, odd little verses.
You come across the church and they say, oh, this church worships on Saturday, or this church believes in...
the gift of tongues, for example, there are a lot in the south, Blossolalia, and it's mentioned in the book of Joel about the gift of tongues.
Or they have, you know, the people with snakes, they do things with snakes down south and conjure with them.
So they just take a verse and then they base a whole sect on it.
And I began looking for odd verses, looking for things, not to write a book, but just out of curiosity.
And I came across things like, in one part of the Bible, it's in the Mosaic Law of how women are forbidden to dress up like men.
Or if a woman touches a man's testicle.
If a woman's husband is fighting with another man, and the woman tries to help her husband,
And it says, if he touches a man on the stone, she should be stoned to death.
She should be killed.
That kind of thing.
And I was thinking... When you see this stuff, do you write it down?
Do you jot it down?
Yeah.
I'm a note-taker.
So I compiled a huge list of very unlikely things.
Then my son was doing it.
And my son was saying, do you know that there's two miracles of loaves and fishes?
And I said, no, really.
And he said, yeah, look.
And he gave me the...
He gave me a reference where the second miracle was.
So the loaves and fishes happen twice, and one smaller than the other.
One's thousands of the other, and one's about 5,000, the other's about 2,000 people, loaves or whatever.
So it's that sort of... I didn't sit down to comb the Bible
food references, I just got interested in the sort of hidden parts of it, in the lesser known parts of it.
And I didn't use them, but I used the idea of there being a part of the Bible that
Just a quick question.
I don't know anyone who's read more books than you, and I have to say, you know, I read it.
I read a lot.
And I'm just wondering, are you a very structured person?
I mean, do you have compartments for writing and for reading and for kayaking and all the other stuff?
No, you know, I do an awful lot of reading when I travel.
I was away for the past... I thought this book tour a week ago, but...
Prior to that, for three weeks, I was traveling.
I just had something to do.
It was an assignment.
And I find travel is very, very stimulating.
And at first, you have a lot of time.
And you have time to kill.
And I was alone.
So I read Frankenstein.
And I read the Gene Reeves autobiography, Smile, Please.
I read Robert Gustafson's travel book, Travels with a Donkey.
I read Life of Francis Bacon, the Painter.
Now, is this stuff that you packed and took with you?
No, no, just... Or is this stuff you pick up along the way?
Bacon, and then I thought, I think I should reread Frankenstein.
I did that.
Then I found a steamy.
So every couple of days, I finished a book.
But when I'm writing, I don't.
I'm a slow reader.
I was reading... I spent about a month or so reading Tender is the Night just, let's say, six months ago.
So I read a lot, but I'm not a fast reader.
The only point I'm making is that travel and vacations really allow me to read a lot.
And then in the normal course of events, when I have a lot of writing to do, I read to relax my mind and before I go to bed read a couple of pages or during the day a couple.
But I'm not really attacking a book.
When's your prime writing time?
Just out of curiosity?
I'm a sort of nine-to-fiver, and so if I haven't done anything in the morning, then I work in the afternoon.
If I have a good morning, then I take the afternoon off.
But I don't... I tend to work all day.
But in the course of writing, I might just find it impossible, and I might pick up a book, anything, and I might read a Hemingway short story or a...
or anything, or I might reread something.
Now, Reynolds Price takes Sundays off, but other than that, he says he writes six days a week.
I mean, do you feel guilty?
I mean, does the Catholic upbringing make you feel like you've committed a sin if you don't write every day?
I mean, do you really feel... I feel better if I've written something, not because of guilt, but because I've given some order for the day.
And I have...
uh a lot of ideas and just the setting them i know that if i haven't written something that i always have something to write and if i haven't done it that day then it might be lost so it's not to the world but to me and um so i always carry my where even when i was on this trip reading frankenstein i had a couple of short stories
in my briefcase that were done but not quite right and so uh whenever when i had a an empty day and a lot of time i i took them out and then looked at them and uh and did something with them but it's uh you know it's like whittling on a stick sure spit shining a shoe is perhaps right but it's not it's not guilt it's uh i think it's a process of life it's
That's a good call.
It's the way I've lived my life.
And there must be people, I think you could compare it with a painter who is, even when they're not painting a picture, they might be out sketching something.
They might sketch something in a sketchbook.
Remember the great New Yorker cartoon, the guy's in the hammock and he says, listen, the writer isn't always writing when he's writing.
Yeah.
It's wonderful.
Wonderful.
Now, just one other quick business-like question.
I mean, are you in the word processor, Jim?
No, no, I still write in longhand.
And the first draft I write in longhand, and I often recopy it in longhand.
And then I...
I word process it.
So there are variant drafts to what you do then?
Yeah, yeah, usually three.
But the initial one is always in longhand.
Word processes are great for, I mean, much better than time writing.
For revisions.
To me, it is a kind of time writing.
Although I must say, I've been using it for other things.
I've got a little more...
But the first book I wrote on a word processor was my Pacific book.
But it's very, very convenient.
I think probably at the end of the day I'm a lot less tired than when I was
No, I couldn't.
I turn it on in the morning.
It's a regular full computer.
It's on for 16 hours the whole day.
I should leave it on 24 hours.
What time do you have?
I bought it from a guy who built it.
Remember how we used to buy stereos with various components?
I couldn't tell you what it is.
It's various components.
It's a 386 with 25 whatever things.
Well, it's like an IBM, and it's got all the power and the memory of that.
I have to say, for instance, this freelance thing I'm doing lately, the column, would be impossible without the computer and the modem.
I mean, everything I file, I mean, it's the same basic story, which I will modify, let's say, for a Quincy thing.
If you had Quincy relations, you know, if there was something really pertinent to write to that readership, I'd put it in.
And I send it over the telephone, and it's in their computer in 45 seconds, you know.
I don't even have to fax it, so there's no typist who can screw it up.
in an interim process.
So, I mean, I don't think I'd attempt it if I were not able to write it on the computer and transmit it on the computer.
You know, it's a wonderful thing.
Well, listen, do you have a P.O.
box down there in Sandwich you'd like me to send this piece to?
Wonderful, yeah.
It's box 858.
Uh-huh.
My phone number is actually within, I'm 888-6205.
So we must be neighbors.
Aren't you Cloud Neck Road?
Well, we're off, you know where Hammond Road is?
And so we're down at the very end on Captain Hook.
And we're on the ocean and we're getting battered.
The town has got to let us do something here.
The erosion is going to... How near the ocean are you?
It's killing us.
I mean, we've lost about 18 feet in the last couple of years.
Are you right on it?
Yeah.
But it's a curse now as much as anything else because... Oh, I was down yesterday.
I'm going to shut off the tape recorder now, okay?
Yep.
Okay.